---
layout: post
title: Google Summer of Code - Formset Improvement
image_show_on_page: true
image: assets/images/blog/gsoc/django.jpg
category: project
url: gsoc
permalink: project/gsoc
description: I have done my Google Summer of Code 2019 project with the Django Software Foundation. This project aimed to improve the FormSet Class in Django, thus enhancing its functionality and ease of use.
---
## About the Project

I worked on the "Form" layer of Django, specifically on FormSet, ModelFormSet, and InlineFormSet. This project aims to improve the above classes, add new features to them, thus enhancing their functionality and ease of use.

Django currently has a formset class which is used as a collection instance for the forms. It’s a layer of abstraction which makes it easier to work with multiple forms. Similarly, ModelFormSet and InlineFormSet are used to handle models and related models respectively.

## Goal of the Project

The broad goal was to have an error-free Formset and close all the tickets related to formset. The end goal of this project was to address as many issues as possible and also make the formsets more user-friendly.

I aimed to give the user more control over the individual forms in the formset, by enabling the user to pass different arguments for <code>__init__()</code> and <code>save()</code> methods of each form.
The next goal was to enable the user to use formsets for edit only purpose, by implementing a robust framework which will disable creating of new model objects, instead of workarounds which can’t do much in case of forged POST requests.
After that, the next goal was to add some new features to formset like pagination, declarative syntax of ModelFormSet & InlineFormSet.

## Technical description

The project as a whole can be divided into smaller independent task. This task were actually the bugs and feature requests that I planned to compelete.

### Initial Tasks

Some of this issues included documentation bugs which helped me to get started and understand the code better (For e.g. [Task 1]({% post_url 2019-06-08-task1 %})). After that I started with implementation of passing custom arguements to the `Formset` class. This required understanding the `BaseFormSet` class. But I figured that this feature was already implemented and could have been achieved with something which was already present, just needed some documentation (See [Task 2]({% post_url 2019-06-09-task2 %})).

### Declarative Syntax for the FormSet, ModelFormSet and InlineFormSet

This task is the highlight of my project. The task was to add declarative syntax support for the `FormSet` class. The declarative syntax is something which one can regularly see in the `Model` or `Form` classes of Django. Example of the same is shown in the below example

```python
class Musician(models.Model):
    first_name = models.CharField(max_length=50)
    last_name = models.CharField(max_length=50)
    instrument = models.CharField(max_length=100)
```

The way formsets were created was using `formset_factory()`, which when passed the desired inputs created a `FormSet` class and returned it. But if you lets say need to have an extra function in your `MyFormSet` then you would first have to derive a class from the `BaseFormSet` then pass it as the argument to `formset_factory` which will then return the desired class with desired methods.

This task involved learning about Metaprogramming, understanding how python classes are actually created, implementing the declarative syntax and most importantly documentation and writing tests. You can read about the full task in detail [here]({% post_url 2019-06-11-task3 %}).

### Wrapping up

After the above tasks, I also fixed some more bugs. Which include things like implementing a secure way to edit only the queried subset of the databse model. This reduced the risk of any adversary manipulating form data in order to edit the database enteries which they are not authorized to do sp. This invovled implementing some checks in order to restrict that only the table enteries which are queried will be modified.

You can read more about my whole experience of the project in detail in [this blog](/blog/gsoc)
